# How to produce multiple elements in React

_cs/blog_

There are a couple of ways to produce multiple elements at once in react. This
helps minimize the code and help you to not repeat yourself.

Let’s say you want to create the following menu icon just using divs.

[menu icon]

One way to do it is to repeat 3 divs back to back and add the same style to each
of them separately. That, obviously, is bad code because it repeats the same
thing 3 times, redundantly. If we wanted to refactor our code in the future it
had to do it in three different places. We can do better than that.

We need to find out how to repeat same thing. First thing comes to mind is using
a for-loop and returning same element back to back. But I have a more elegant
Javascript way. Instead of for-loop we are going to use the map function to go
over an anonymous array.

First we are going to create the array on the fly with spread operator: `[...Array(3)]`

Then from here it’s our old regular “map” function:

```
… some other jsx

<div className={styles.burger}>
    {[...Array(3)].map((x,i) => {
        return (
            <div
                key={i}
                style={{ backgroundColor: dark ? "#ddd" : "#444", }}
            >
            </div>
        )
    })}
</div>

…. some other jsx

```

Notice we wrote the style just once.

Two things I want to point out. Normally, it’s not recommended to use array
indexes as keys to react elements. But in this case, we are definitely sure that
our array is not going to change. So we are safe in that regard to use array
indexes as keys. Secondly, if we had used normal parentheses or curlies instead
of the square brackets around the rest operation we would get an error. So it’s
important to use the array spread not other kind of spreads.

This is one way of how to produce multiple elements in one go.
