# Using an Array React useEffect Dependency Array

_cs/blog_

In react useEffect is used to track the changes in states and then fire the
effects when there is one. For the primitive states such as numbers, strings,
booleans useEffect simply compares the previous and current state and if there
is a change then it fires the effect. But when it comes to more complex states
the way useEffect handles the equality changes drastically and most of the time
may cause bugs in the application that is hard to track.

For example in the following code: even though we are changing one the array
elements useEffect is unable to detect that change because when it compares
compound data types such as arrays, objects, functions it uses referential
equality. Referential equality is to look if the reference to the data is
pointing to the same field in the memory. In low level languages that’s called,
well, a pointer. Because it does not store the data itself, but the address of
the data in the memory. For example look at that code how it all points to the
same data event with all the changes:

```
const arr = ["one", "two"] const other
= arr other.push("three") const yetanother = arr yetanother[0] = "ten"
console.log("arr:", arr) console.log("other:", other) console.log("yetanother:",
yetanother) console.log("other === arr:", other===arr) console.log("yetother ===
arr:", yetanother===arr) console.log("spread(other) === arr:", [...other]===arr)
console.log("spread(yetanother) === arr:", [...yetanother]===arr)
console.log("spread(other) === spread(arr):", [...other]===[...arr])
console.log("spread(yetanother) === spread(arr):", [...yetanother]===[...arr])
console.log("spread(other) === spread(other):", [...other]===[...other])
console.log("spread(yetanother) === spread(yetanother):",
[...yetanother]===[...yetanother])

console output: arr: [ 'ten', 'two', 'three' ] other: [ 'ten', 'two', 'three' ]
yetanother: [ 'ten', 'two', 'three' ] other === arr: true yetother === arr: true
spread(other) === arr: false spread(yetanother) === arr: false spread(other) ===
spread(arr): false spread(yetanother) === spread(arr): false spread(other) ===
spread(other): false spread(yetanother) === spread(yetanother): false
```

So, after that slight divergence how we are gonna fix our issue when we need to
pass an array, an object, or a function to React’s useEffect hook?

1. Stringifying the data One approach could be to stringify the data and that is
   one of the [recommended
   method](https://github.com/facebook/react/issues/14476#issuecomment-471199055)
   by Dan Abramov, one of the developers of React, in the early days of React. But
   this approach has its own caveats that I’ll mention in a second.

So the way to use it in the component we stringify our complex data, an array in
that case, and pass that string to the useEffect. Since string will change
anytime there is a change to the array, our effect will fire just as expected

Beware that, you may get eslint missing dependency and
react-hooks/exhaustive-deps warnings when using that method.

2. Writing our own helper method One caveat of the stringifying (what a verb)
   method is that it’s expensive and if you are working on a performance hungary
   app than every bit of improvement counts. If you check the v8 engine’s
   [json.Stringify
   code](https://github.com/v8/v8/blob/main/src/json/json-stringifier.cc) it’s 1100
   lines. Do we really need to run that much code for our use case? I would say we
   can do better if we are handcrafting our app and open to manual improvements.
   What if we wrote our own comparator function that check if there is any change
   in the array elements and then fire the effect. Here is the code:

```
function
arrayEqual(a1: any[], a2: any[]) { if (a1.length !== a2.length) return false;
for (let i = 0; i < a1.length; i++) { if (a1[i] !== a2[i]) { return false; } }
return true; }

type MaybeCleanUpFn = void | (() => void);

function useNumberArrayEffect(cb: () => MaybeCleanUpFn, deps: number[]) { const
ref = useRef<number[]>(deps);

  if (!arrayEqual(deps, ref.current)) { ref.current = deps; }

  useEffect(cb, [ref.current]); }
```

Note that if there is a change in length
of the array we are exiting the code just in 3 lines of code, which is amazing
and way cheaper than json.Stringify. And I would argue that that is what
happens most of the time in our applications. And we are way better on
average.

People also suggest to spread the array into dependency list but I would say
that is a more expensive way than what we did above, because every time you run
through the whole array and keep each element in a separate variable in memory
and who knows what other measures reactjs is taking to keep us safe in the
background.

3. Using deep equality checking tools

4. Creating a primitive to keep tally If you really need that performance, one
   method you can use is just use a primitive data type to keep track of the
   changes in the array. For example: `array = [11,12,13] MyArrayChanged:number
= 0 array.push(14) MyArrayChanged++` And put that primitive data type into
   dependency array. But I should say this is error prune and someone else using
   your code (even future you) may easily skip over.

So pick your game and let me know if you have any comments or any ideas to
tackle that issue.
