# Communicating Sequential Processes

_cs/blog_, _paper_

This post is about the Tony Hoare's seminal 1978 paper ["Communicating
Sequential Processes"](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~crary/819-f09/Hoare78.pdf). The
reason I read that paper is mainly because Go's concurrency model is based off
of this paper. And when you read the paper you can easily see the influence. I
would say it's a relatively easy read compared to some other more low level CS
academic papers. It carries features of most other successful papers such that
it introduces the topic to the reader as if the reader does not know much about
the topic and gradually builds up to desired result. Interestingly, it also
includes examples, questions, answers in the paper that you would mostly expect
to see in text books. One of those examples is the Dijkstra's famous Dining
Philosophers problem. Other examples are also well worth perusing.

The main idea of the paper is that we can use messages between different
processes to synchronize and/or share data. There are also hints to what's now
known as mutexes.

In the paper writer introduces and uses a different kind of programming syntax
but it's easy to understand and follow. It not only introduces the concept but
also mentions possible misuses and problems that programmers may come across.
For example, at one section it mentions one of the most common bugs that you
can come across when using goroutines: a process waiting on a channel which is
no longer has a sender or a process that is waiting to send on a channel which
doesn't have a receiver on the other end.

After this first publication, Hoare and his friends improved and better
streamlined the paper in later years. And it become one of the most influential
papers of the computer science. The concept of Communicating Sequential Process
has been used in many languages such as Erlang, Closure, and latest and
greatest Go.
