# Communicating Sequential Processes

_cs/blog_, _paper_

This post is about the Tony Hoare's seminal 1978 paper ["Communicating
Sequential Processes"](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~crary/819-f09/Hoare78.pdf). The
reason I read that paper is mainly because Go's concurrency model is based off
of this paper. And when you read the paper you can easily see the influence. I
would say it's a relatively easy read compared to some other more low level CS
academic papers. It carry features of most other successful papers such that it
introduces the topic to the reader as if the reader does not know much about
the topic and gradually builds up to desired result. Interestingly, it also
includes examples, questions, answers in the paper that you would mostly expect
to see in text books. One of those examples is the Dijkstra's famous Dining
Philosophers problem. Other examples are also well worth perusing.

The main idea of the paper is that we can use messages between different
processes to synchronize and/or share data. There are also hints to what's now
known as mutexes.

It introduces and uses a different kind of programming syntax but it's easy to
understand. It not only introduces the concept but also mentions possible
misuses and problems that programmers may come across. For example, at one
section it mentions one of the most prominent bugs that you can come across
when using goroutines: a process waiting on a channel which is no longer has a
sender, a channel that is waiting to send on channel which don't have a
receiver on the other end.

After first publication, Hoare and his friends improved and more streamlined
this paper in later years. And it become one of the most influential papers of
the computer science. The concept of the paper is used in the languages such as
Erlang, Closure, and Go.
